so this is Chris Lane I'm at
metropolitan United Church in Toronto
and I just want to talk a little bit
about registration on the organ this is
the largest organ in Canada actually a
very large Casavant organ which was
built in Quebec and installed here at
Metropolitan in 1930 and my impression
is that it's pretty much remained
unchanged since that point except with
the exception of in addition in the back
of seven new ranks in the late 90s I
believe but the front organ is pretty
much unchanged and the the style of
organ building particularly at that time
in the first part of the 20th century
was one of making the organ be an
orchestra so with an organ like this
particularly we have so many sets of
pipes that are designed to mimic
orchestral colors and on this organ
there's even a division a whole section
of the instrument that is called the
orchestral division and in it can you
you can find not only your standard
organ sounds like flutes or strings but
you can also find a plethora of color
readings so we have a French horn
English horn
in orchestral oboe
a corner of the besito clarinet a
trombone
an orchestral trumpet a tuba and even a
high-pitched tube and then some really
stringy strings which are not common on
many organs then a lot of strength
and of course on the organ you can then
take that car
because all those pipes live in a big
box with shades on the side so when I'm
approaching instrument like this and I
want to set up a piece this Elgar which
was on the CD that I made for Atma and
will play here tomorrow night is an
orchestral transcription for a long time
that's how many people around the world
actually heard orchestral music because
small cities couldn't usually support an
orchestra so this orchestral music would
be played on the organ and this piece in
particular was actually transcribed for
organ right from the outset from the
publisher so that it would have more
kind of lasting popularity
so essentially registration of the organ
in my mind is essentially orchestrating
a piece and whether it's Bach or whether
it's Elgar that's what you're doing is
you're orchestrating and using the organ
in that way and so I just go searching
for the sounds that I want but it's
really that simple
and you can combine them or you like and
I kind of have what I want to hear in my
head and then I try to find at the best
I can
so in this organ we have this little
lick here at the beginning now you could
play that on any different colors but
like I I play it down here the center
phone kind of coupled in which is a very
very loud principal sound so that kind
of gives it just a little bit of
immediacy down here and then I play with
a little bit more clarity up here
and I want to add a little bit more so
I'm just going to actually just add this
at this point
there's this little kind of bike pump at
the end and so for that like I feel like
it means just a little bit more pedal so
I'm hitting a peddle piston here which
is adding just a few stops including the
lowest pipes on the organ